README.md, before:

# Sales First - Self-Service Business Intelligence

Step by step Self-Service BI implementation using Microsoft Power BI.

This work is done as an assignment under the course **Business Intelligence and Decision Support Systems - SENG 42673** of **BSc in Software Engineering, University of Kelaniya**.

Facilitator: [Mr. Dinesh Priyankara](https://lk.linkedin.com/in/dineshpriyankara).

Presentation : [Click here](https://www.slideshare.net/JayathmaChathurangan/sales-first-bi-solution1).

## 1. Introduction

We work for a company named **SalesFirst (Pvt)** Ltd. The IT department has developed a relational data warehouse addressing business intelligence requirement related to the company. The logical ER
diagram related to the data warehouse designed is shown below

![sales by order date](images/erd_before.png)

IT department has implemented an ETL solution for loading data into the data warehouse. **ETL solution is scheduled to execute every day** during off-peak hours. Customer information is NOT maintained in the data warehouse. However, it is available as a text file.

1. Data Warehouse - SQL Server ([backup_file](resource-files/SalesFirst.bak))
2. Customer Dimension in a Flat CSV file ([csv_vile](resource-files/Customers.csv)) - For demonstrating inclusion of external resources.

## 2. Requirement

We need to design a **reporting** and **dashboard** solution, addressing business requirements. Our BA has gathered required details for the solution. The following points shows requirements related to the reporting and dashboard solution

### **Sales department** needs a report (or multiple reports) that shows following items

1. Sales Amount **by month** for the current year or selected year.
1. Sales Amount **by Product Category** for the current year or selected year. Should be able to easily view Sales of **Sub Categories** for a **specific Category** and Sales of Products for a **specific Sub Category**.
1. **YTD Sales Amount** by month for the current year or selected year. Prefer to see YTD Sales **along with monthly Sales** and should be able to see the **trend** clearly.
1. **Comparison** between Sales Amount for last year and current year (or selected year) for each month.
1. Sales Amount **by Country**. Should be able to immediately and clearly see countries with **higher sales** and countries with **lower sales**.
1. Sales Amount for the current month and year (or selected month and year).
1. **Last-Year-Same-Month** Sales Amount for the current month and year (or selected month and year).
1. Sales Amount **by customer location** for the **month**, should be able to see the locations of customer clearly.
1. Sales Amount, Total Product Cost and Tax Amount **by Date**, Category and Currency, for the current month and year (or selected month and year). Should be able to see **highest** and **lower** values of all added easily.

### **Top manage** needs a dashboard (or multiple dashboards) that shows

1. **YTD** Sales Amount for the **current** year.
1. Monthly Sales Amount along with Last Year Same Month Sales Amount, by month for the current year.
1. Sales Amount by country for the current year.

### In addition to the reports and dashboards required, following should be supported

1. Self-Service business intelligence: Business users should be able to create their own reports using a predefined model.
1. Easy to use reporting platform.
1. Collaboration among business users.

## 3. Load Data

Restore the Data Warehouse ([backup_file](resource-files/SalesFirst.bak)) to SQL Server and load it in Power BI Desktop and load Customer CSV file ([csv_vile](resource-files/Customers.csv)).
![load sql server data warehouse and customer flat file](images/load_resources.png)

## 4. Add Date Dimension

Create new table called ***Date***.

```dax
Date = CALENDAR(DATE(2011, 1,1), DATE(2022, 12, 31))
```

![date table](images/date_table.png)

![date type](images/date_type.png)

Following are the DAX expressions to create other fields.
```dax
Year = FORMAT('Date'[Date], "yyyy")
MonthNumber = FORMAT('Date'[Date], "m")
MonthName = FORMAT('Date'[Date], "mmmm")
Day = FORMAT('Date'[Date], "d")
DateKey = FORMAT('Date'[Date], "yyyymmdd")
DayOfWeekNumber = WEEKDAY('Date'[Date], 2)
DayOfWeek = FORMAT('Date'[Date],"dddd")
```

![date other fields](images/date_other_fields.png)

## 5. Add Customers and Date Dimensions

![sales by order date](images/erd_after.png)

## 6. Proposed Designs for the Reports

### Dashboard

![Dashboard](images/Sketch_Dahsboard.jpg)

**Visual types used and the reason**.
- ***Cards with KPI***      	- YTD sales for the current year, month and day (Since it is the Key for strategic level decisions)
- ***Clustured Column Chart*** 	- Sales amount along with last year sales amount by month (Categorical data and comparison make easier)
- ***Basic Map***               - Sales amount by country (Quantitative nature and spatial location)

## 7. Implementation

### Reports

1. Anual Sales ![Anula Sales](images/anual_sales.png)

1. Monthly Sales ![Monthly Sales](images/monthly_sales.png)

### Dashboard

![Dashboard Implemented](images/dashboard.png)

## 8. Simulate ETL

> IT department has implemented an ETL solution for loading data into the data warehouse. ETL solution is scheduled to execute every day during off-peak hours.

For the demonstration lets add some sales values of for ***December 2018***.
![sales by order date](images/sales_order_date.png)

Let's add same sales values from ***December 2016*** to ***December 2018***. Execute the following.

```sql
SELECT *
INTO dbo.sales_temp
FROM dbo.FactInternetSales
WHERE YEAR(OrderDate) = 2016 and MONTH(OrderDate) = 12

UPDATE dbo.sales_temp
SET orderdate = DATEADD(YY, +2, orderdate)

INSERT INTO dbo.FactInternetSales
SELECT * FROM dbo.sales_temp
```

Now execute the following to check the insertion.

```sql
SELECT TOP (10) *
FROM [SalesFirstDW].[dbo].[FactInternetSales]
ORDER BY OrderDate DESC
```

Results.
![sales by order date](images/check_insertion.png)

The model can be refreshed easily with a single click and continue getting business insight.
![sales by order date](images/updated_table.png)

You can reset this with executing following SQL script and refresh from Power BI again.

```sql
DELETE
FROM dbo.FactInternetSales
WHERE YEAR(OrderDate) = 2018 and MONTH(OrderDate) = 12

DROP TABLE dbo.sales_temp
```

Commit message:

Sketches of the reports are added (#2)

README.md, after:

# Sales First - Self-Service Business Intelligence

Step by step Self-Service BI implementation using Microsoft Power BI.

This work is done as an assignment under the course **Business Intelligence and Decision Support Systems - SENG 42673** of **BSc in Software Engineering, University of Kelaniya**.

Facilitator: [Mr. Dinesh Priyankara](https://lk.linkedin.com/in/dineshpriyankara).

Presentation : [Click here](https://www.slideshare.net/JayathmaChathurangan/sales-first-bi-solution1).

## 1. Introduction

We work for a company named **SalesFirst (Pvt)** Ltd. The IT department has developed a relational data warehouse addressing business intelligence requirement related to the company. The logical ER
diagram related to the data warehouse designed is shown below

![sales by order date](images/erd_before.png)

IT department has implemented an ETL solution for loading data into the data warehouse. **ETL solution is scheduled to execute every day** during off-peak hours. Customer information is NOT maintained in the data warehouse. However, it is available as a text file.

1. Data Warehouse - SQL Server ([backup_file](resource-files/SalesFirst.bak))
2. Customer Dimension in a Flat CSV file ([csv_vile](resource-files/Customers.csv)) - For demonstrating inclusion of external resources.

## 2. Requirement

We need to design a **reporting** and **dashboard** solution, addressing business requirements. Our BA has gathered required details for the solution. The following points shows requirements related to the reporting and dashboard solution

### **Sales department** needs a report (or multiple reports) that shows following items

1. Sales Amount **by month** for the current year or selected year.
1. Sales Amount **by Product Category** for the current year or selected year. Should be able to easily view Sales of **Sub Categories** for a **specific Category** and Sales of Products for a **specific Sub Category**.
1. **YTD Sales Amount** by month for the current year or selected year. Prefer to see YTD Sales **along with monthly Sales** and should be able to see the **trend** clearly.
1. **Comparison** between Sales Amount for last year and current year (or selected year) for each month.
1. Sales Amount **by Country**. Should be able to immediately and clearly see countries with **higher sales** and countries with **lower sales**.
1. Sales Amount for the current month and year (or selected month and year).
1. **Last-Year-Same-Month** Sales Amount for the current month and year (or selected month and year).
1. Sales Amount **by customer location** for the **month**, should be able to see the locations of customer clearly.
1. Sales Amount, Total Product Cost and Tax Amount **by Date**, Category and Currency, for the current month and year (or selected month and year). Should be able to see **highest** and **lower** values of all added easily.

### **Top manage** needs a dashboard (or multiple dashboards) that shows

1. **YTD** Sales Amount for the **current** year.
1. Monthly Sales Amount along with Last Year Same Month Sales Amount, by month for the current year.
1. Sales Amount by country for the current year.

### In addition to the reports and dashboards required, following should be supported

1. Self-Service business intelligence: Business users should be able to create their own reports using a predefined model.
1. Easy to use reporting platform.
1. Collaboration among business users.

## 3. Load Data

Restore the Data Warehouse ([backup_file](resource-files/SalesFirst.bak)) to SQL Server and load it in Power BI Desktop and load Customer CSV file ([csv_vile](resource-files/Customers.csv)).
![load sql server data warehouse and customer flat file](images/load_resources.png)

## 4. Add Date Dimension

Create new table called ***Date***.

```dax
Date = CALENDAR(DATE(2011, 1,1), DATE(2022, 12, 31))
```

![date table](images/date_table.png)

![date type](images/date_type.png)

Following are the DAX expressions to create other fields.
```dax
Year = FORMAT('Date'[Date], "yyyy")
MonthNumber = FORMAT('Date'[Date], "m")
MonthName = FORMAT('Date'[Date], "mmmm")
Day = FORMAT('Date'[Date], "d")
DateKey = FORMAT('Date'[Date], "yyyymmdd")
DayOfWeekNumber = WEEKDAY('Date'[Date], 2)
DayOfWeek = FORMAT('Date'[Date],"dddd")
```

![date other fields](images/date_other_fields.png)

## 5. Add Customers and Date Dimensions

![sales by order date](images/erd_after.png)

## 6. Proposed Designs for the Reports

### Dashboard

![Dashboard](images/Sketch_Dahsboard.jpg)

**Visual types used and the reason**.
- ***Cards with KPI***      	- YTD sales for the current year, month and day (Since it is the Key for strategic level decisions)
- ***Clustured Column Chart*** 	- Sales amount along with last year sales amount by month (Categorical data and comparison make easier)
- ***Basic Map***               - Sales amount by country (Quantitative nature and spatial location)

### Reports

![Annual Report](images/sketch_anual_report.jpg)

![Monthly Report](images/sketch_monthly_report.jpg)

**Visual types used and the reason**.
- ***Cards with KPI***      	- YTD sales for the current year, month and day (Since it is the Key for strategic level decisions)
- ***Donut Chart***      		- Sales amount by product category (Categorical data and comparison make easier)
- ***Clustured Column Chart*** 	- Sales amount along with last year sales amount by month (Categorical data and comparison make easier)
- ***Basic Map***               - Sales amount by country (Quantitative nature and spatial location)
- ***Stacked Column Chart***    - Sales, total product cost and tax amount by currency, & Sales, total product cost and tax amount by day(Categorical data and comparison make easier with break down and compare parts of a whole)

## 7. Implementation

### Reports

1. Anual Sales ![Anula Sales](images/anual_sales.png)

1. Monthly Sales ![Monthly Sales](images/monthly_sales.png)

### Dashboard

![Dashboard Implemented](images/dashboard.png)

## 8. Simulate ETL

> IT department has implemented an ETL solution for loading data into the data warehouse. ETL solution is scheduled to execute every day during off-peak hours.

For the demonstration lets add some sales values of for ***December 2018***.
![sales by order date](images/sales_order_date.png)

Let's add same sales values from ***December 2016*** to ***December 2018***. Execute the following.

```sql
SELECT *
INTO dbo.sales_temp
FROM dbo.FactInternetSales
WHERE YEAR(OrderDate) = 2016 and MONTH(OrderDate) = 12

UPDATE dbo.sales_temp
SET orderdate = DATEADD(YY, +2, orderdate)

INSERT INTO dbo.FactInternetSales
SELECT * FROM dbo.sales_temp
```

Now execute the following to check the insertion.

```sql
SELECT TOP (10) *
FROM [SalesFirstDW].[dbo].[FactInternetSales]
ORDER BY OrderDate DESC
```

Results.
![sales by order date](images/check_insertion.png)

The model can be refreshed easily with a single click and continue getting business insight.
![sales by order date](images/updated_table.png)

You can reset this with executing following SQL script and refresh from Power BI again.

```sql
DELETE
FROM dbo.FactInternetSales
WHERE YEAR(OrderDate) = 2018 and MONTH(OrderDate) = 12

DROP TABLE dbo.sales_temp
```
